v7.14.0 (#14294)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 7.13.1

_Aug 22, 2024_

> We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 12 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 13 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:
```

- 💫 Allow [filtering the axis on zoom](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/zoom-and-pan/#zoom-filtering), making the axis adapt by removing values outside the view.

  <img width="600" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e65bbd00-d2a8-4136-81cd-3598f1373c16" alt="filtering the axis on zoom" />

- 📊 Improve bar chart performances

> - 🌍 Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale Data Grid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🌍 Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale on the Data Grid
```

> - 🌍 Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale on the Date and Time Pickers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🌍 Improve Chinese (zh-HK) and Vietnamese (vi-VN) locales on the Date and Time Pickers
```

> - 🌍 Improve Vietnamese (vi-VN) locale on the Date and Time Pickers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- 🐞 Bugfixes

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@7.13.1`

> - [data grid] Use readonly array result for getTreeDataPath (#11743) @pcorpet

Reviewer: Nitpick for consistency.
```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Use readonly array result for `getTreeDataPath` (#11743) @pcorpet
```

> - [data grid] use `event.key` for `Tab` and `Escape` keys (#14170) @k-rajat19

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [data grid] Use `event.key` for `Tab` and `Escape` keys (#14170) @k-rajat19
```

> - [data grid] use `event.key` for `Tab` and `Escape` keys (#14170) @k-rajat19

Reviewer: Just merged a PR
```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Use `event.key` for `Tab` and `Escape` keys (#14170) @k-rajat19
- [DataGrid] Introduce selectors with arguments (#14236) @MBilalShafi
```

- [DataGrid] include `api` in `gridCellParams` interface (#14201) @k-rajat19
- [l10n] Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale (#14135) @chirimiri22

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.13.1` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@7.13.1`.

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@7.13.1` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.13.1`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Clipboard paste not working for a single cell if the current page is not the first page (#14261) @arminmeh
- [DataGridPremium] Fix `onCellSelectionModelChange` not triggered when additional cell range is selected (#14199) @arminmeh

### Date and Time Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.13.1`

- [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale (#13289) @yeeharn

> - [l10n] Improve Vietnamese (vi-VN) locale (#14238) @locnbk2002

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [l10n] Improve Vietnamese (vi-VN) locale (#14238) @locnbk2002
- [TimePicker] Handle `Space` and `Enter` on the `TimeClock` component @arthurbalduini
```

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.13.1` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.13.1`.

### Charts

#### `@mui/x-charts@7.13.1`

- [charts] Fix grid overflow with zooming (#14280) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Improve bar chart performances (#14278) @alexfauquette

> - [charts] Test pointer events (#14042) @alexfauquette

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [charts] Test pointer events (#14042) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Use `isPointInside` function for both graphs and axis (#14222) @JCQuintas
```

#### `@mui/x-date-charts-pro@7.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-charts@7.13.1`, plus:

- [charts-pro] Zoom axis filtering (#14121) @JCQuintas

### Docs

- [docs] Consistent use of UTC and timezones (#14250) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix missing leading slashes in URLs (#14249) @oliviertassinari

> - [docs][pickers] Dash usage revision (#14260) @arthurbalduini

Reviewer 2: AFAIK, we haven't yet used this standard that Core is using in the changelog. 🤔 
Not sure if we should start doing it in certain cases...
What do others think?
I would even consider a counter argument—keeping only the second prefix in such cases as we are already listing changes in the `Docs` section. 🙈 🤷

Reviewer 3: I agree that we could omit of the [docs] label since it's redundant with the section title.

### Core

- [core] Follow JSDocs convention @oliviertassinari
- [core] Prepare for material v6 (#14143) @LukasTy

> - Use `isPointInside` function for both graphs and axis (#14222) @JCQuintas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 7.14.0

> _Aug 22, 2024_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Aug 23, 2024_
```

> We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 13 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 14 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:
```

> - 💫 Allow [filtering the axis on zoom](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/zoom-and-pan/#zoom-filtering), making the axis adapt by removing values outside the view.

Reviewer 4: This is technically a new feature, should be bump to `7.14`?

Author: Bumped✅

  <img width="600" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e65bbd00-d2a8-4136-81cd-3598f1373c16" alt="filtering the axis on zoom" />

- 📊 Improve bar chart performances

> - 🌍 Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale on the Data Grid

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 🌍 Improve Czech (cs-CZ) and Hebrew (he-IL) locales on the Data Grid
```

> - 🌍 Improve Chinese (zh-HK) and Vietnamese (vi-VN) locales on the Date and Time Pickers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 🌍 Improve Chinese (zh-HK), Hebrew (he-IL), and Vietnamese (vi-VN) locales on the Date and Time Pickers
```

- 🐞 Bugfixes

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@7.14.0`

- [DataGrid] Use readonly array result for `getTreeDataPath` (#11743) @pcorpet
- [DataGrid] Use `event.key` for `Tab` and `Escape` keys (#14170) @k-rajat19
- [DataGrid] Introduce selectors with arguments (#14236) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] include `api` in `gridCellParams` interface (#14201) @k-rajat19

> - [l10n] Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale (#14135) @chirimiri22

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [l10n] Improve Czech (cs-CZ) locale (#14135) @chirimiri22
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#14287) @rotembarsela
```

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.14.0` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@7.14.0`.

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@7.14.0` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.14.0`, plus:

> - [DataGridPremium] Clipboard paste not working for a single cell if the current page is not the first page (#14261) @arminmeh

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPremium] Fix clipboard paste not working for a single cell on non-first page (#14261) @arminmeh
```

- [DataGridPremium] Fix `onCellSelectionModelChange` not triggered when additional cell range is selected (#14199) @arminmeh

### Date and Time Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.14.0`

> - [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale (#13289) @yeeharn

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale (#13289) @yeeharn
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#14287) @rotembarsela
```

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@7.13.1`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Clipboard paste not working for a single cell if the current page is not the first page (#14261) @arminmeh
- [DataGridPremium] Fix `onCellSelectionModelChange` not triggered when additional cell range is selected (#14199) @arminmeh

### Date and Time Pickers

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.13.1`

- [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale (#13289) @yeeharn
- [l10n] Improve Vietnamese (vi-VN) locale (#14238) @locnbk2002
- [TimePicker] Handle `Space` and `Enter` on the `TimeClock` component @arthurbalduini

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.13.1` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.13.1`.

### Charts

#### `@mui/x-charts@7.13.1`

- [charts] Fix grid overflow with zooming (#14280) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Improve bar chart performances (#14278) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Test pointer events (#14042) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Use `isPointInside` function for both graphs and axis (#14222) @JCQuintas

> #### `@mui/x-date-charts-pro@7.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Author: I just noticed this 🙈  I'll change it in the previous entries too
```suggestion
#### `@mui/x-charts-pro@7.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')
```

Reviewer 2: Whoops. 🙈 😆

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.14.0`

- [l10n] Improve Chinese (zh-HK) locale (#13289) @yeeharn
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#14287) @rotembarsela
- [l10n] Improve Vietnamese (vi-VN) locale (#14238) @locnbk2002
- [TimePicker] Handle `Space` and `Enter` on the `TimeClock` component @arthurbalduini

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@7.14.0` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@7.14.0`.

### Charts

#### `@mui/x-charts@7.14.0`

- [charts] Fix grid overflow with zooming (#14280) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Improve bar chart performances (#14278) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Test pointer events (#14042) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Use `isPointInside` function for both graphs and axis (#14222) @JCQuintas

#### `@mui/x-charts-pro@7.0.0-alpha.2` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-charts@7.14.0`, plus:

- [charts-pro] Zoom axis filtering (#14121) @JCQuintas

### Docs

- [docs] Consistent use of UTC and timezones (#14250) @oliviertassinari
- [docs] Fix missing leading slashes in URLs (#14249) @oliviertassinari

> - [docs][pickers] Dash usage revision (#14260) @arthurbalduini

Author: So would this do? @LukasTy @arthurbalduini 
```suggestion
- [pickers] Dash usage revision (#14260) @arthurbalduini
```

Reviewer 2: I've checked https://github.com/mui/material-ui/releases and it seems like they are doing exactly this. 👌

Reviewer 3: @LukasTy But it looks like they are also omitting the `[docs]` label for changes that touch the whole docs, so, if we want to follow the same pattern, we would need to remove it from the other changes, no ?

> - [docs][pickers] Dash usage revision (#14260) @arthurbalduini

Reviewer 3: @noraleonte I think since we didn't discuss it very much, we might not want to change our pattern for now. I think we could just omit the `[pickers]` label and raise the discussion later, if it's relevant 🙂 

```suggestion
- [docs] Dash usage revision on pickers pages (#14260) @arthurbalduini
```

Author: Tbh, Arthur's suggestion looks way more consistent with the current structure 🤔

Reviewer 2: Yes, it does.
We can go with it. 👍 
Clearly, it would be best to adopt the `MUI Core` changelog approach completely, not change by change. 👍

- [charts] Rename `CartesianContextProvider` to `CartesianProvider` (#14102) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Support axis with the same value for all data points (#14191) @alexfauquette

> #### `@mui/x-charts-pro@7.0.0-alpha.1` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Reviewer 2: Could we also fix this issue in the `releaseChangelog` script to avoid further problems? 🤔 🙏

Author: done I think 😅
